eng/100_bazi_kanune.md, before:

# The basic rules of Pandunia

These are the basic rules of Pandunia language.
They are described in more detail later in this document.

1. The spelling follows the pronunciation exactly.
2. The last syllable of the word stem is stressed.
3. Words consist of a stem and one or more suffixes.
   The last suffix indicates the word class to which the word belongs.
    - Adjectives end in **-i**, ex. **novi** = new.
    - Adverbs end in **-o**, ex. **novo** = newly.
    - Active verbs end in **-a**, ex. **me loga** = I speak.
    - Passive verbs end in **-u**, ex. **le logu** = It is spoken.
    - Nouns end in **-e**, **-ia** or a consonant.
4. Nouns have a single, unchanging form.
5. Adjectives come before the word that they modify.
   All adjectives, except the most common few, end in **-i**.
    - ex. **rapidi loge** = Fast speech.
6. Adverbs modify verbs, adjectives, other adverbs and complete sentences.
   They come before the word that they modify or very last in the sentence.
   All adverbs, except the most common few, end in **-o**.
    - ex. 1. **vero rapidi loge** = Very fast speech.
    - ex. 2. **te loga bono.** = You talk well.
7. The verb ending **-a** indicates that the verb is active
   and the agent of the action is immediately before the verb.
    - ex. **me yama aple.** = I eat apples.
8. The verb ending -u indicates that the verb is passive
   and the recipient of the action is immediately before the verb.
    - ex. **aple yamu.** = Apples are eaten.
9. In the _pivot structure_, the object of the transitive verb
   functions as the subject of the next verb.
    - ex. **me cinga te dona pes.** = I ask you to give money.
10. Pronouns can be left out when they are obvious and redundant.
    - **me suala te baxa pandunia?** → **suala te baxa pandunia?** = Do
      you speak Pandunia?
    - **me cinga te loga klaro.** →  **cinga loga klaro.**
      = Please speak clearly.
11. Compound words are created by putting the word stems side by side.
    The linking vowel **-o-** is inserted between the stems.
    - ex. **hur-** (freedom) + **ist-** (proponent) → **huriste** (liberalist)
    - ex. **post-** (mail) + **sanduk-** (box) → **postosanduke** (mailbox)

Commit message:

muta name za Pandunia pa Panlingue

eng/100_bazi_kanune.md, after:

# The basic rules of Panlingue

These are the basic rules of Panlingue language.
They are described in more detail later in this document.

1. The spelling follows the pronunciation exactly.
2. The last syllable of the word stem is stressed.
3. Words consist of a stem and one or more suffixes.
   The last suffix indicates the word class to which the word belongs.
    - Adjectives end in **-i**, ex. **novi** = new.
    - Adverbs end in **-o**, ex. **novo** = newly.
    - Active verbs end in **-a**, ex. **me loga** = I speak.
    - Passive verbs end in **-u**, ex. **le logu** = It is spoken.
    - Nouns end in **-e**, **-ia** or a consonant.
4. Nouns have a single, unchanging form.
5. Adjectives come before the word that they modify.
   All adjectives, except the most common few, end in **-i**.
    - ex. **rapidi loge** = Fast speech.
6. Adverbs modify verbs, adjectives, other adverbs and complete sentences.
   They come before the word that they modify or very last in the sentence.
   All adverbs, except the most common few, end in **-o**.
    - ex. 1. **vero rapidi loge** = Very fast speech.
    - ex. 2. **te loga bono.** = You talk well.
7. The verb ending **-a** indicates that the verb is active
   and the agent of the action is immediately before the verb.
    - ex. **me yama aple.** = I eat apples.
8. The verb ending -u indicates that the verb is passive
   and the recipient of the action is immediately before the verb.
    - ex. **aple yamu.** = Apples are eaten.
9. In the _pivot structure_, the object of the transitive verb
   functions as the subject of the next verb.
    - ex. **me cinga te dona pes.** = I ask you to give money.
10. Pronouns can be left out when they are obvious and redundant.
    - **me suala te baxa panlingue?** → **suala te baxa panlingue?** = Do
      you speak Panlingue?
    - **me cinga te loga klaro.** →  **cinga loga klaro.**
      = Please speak clearly.
11. Compound words are created by putting the word stems side by side.
    The linking vowel **-o-** is inserted between the stems.
    - ex. **hur-** (freedom) + **ist-** (proponent) → **huriste** (liberalist)
    - ex. **post-** (mail) + **sanduk-** (box) → **postosanduke** (mailbox)
