eng/esperanti_i_pandunia.md, before:

# Esperanto vs. Pandunia

Esperanto has been the most popular constructed auxiliary language for
over a century since the 1890s. That's why all new auxiliary languages
are rightfully compared to it.


Esperanto has been criticized over the years. Many of the recurring
points of critique are included in Justin B. Rye's article
[Learn Not to Speak Esperanto](http://jbr.me.uk/ranto/index.html).
It has been replied in detail by [Vítor De Araújo]
(https://elmord.org/misc/kontrauranto/) and more broadly by
[Claude Piron](http://claudepiron.free.fr/articlesenanglais/why.htm)
among many others.

Despite all the critique, Esperanto has its merits and its relative
success among auxiliary languages is undeniable. But does it really
deserve its success? Is Esperanto really an ideal world language?
In this article we will review the most important points of critique
and compare Esperanto to Pandunia.



## Alphabet

The alphabet of Esperanto is as follows:

    A B C Ĉ D E F G Ĝ H Ĥ I J Ĵ K L M N O P R S Ŝ T U Ŭ V Z
    a b c ĉ d e f g ĝ h ĥ i j ĵ k l m n o p r s ŝ t u ŭ v z

People often criticize the letters with "hats" because they are not
included in the standard keyboards of typewriters, computers and smart
devices. The letters with hats really are a problem that could have been avoided.

What is often overlooked is that there are two sets of letters: big
letters and small letters. Both do the same basic task: they represent spoken
language in writing. It's like using two different hammers to hit one nail.
Most writing systems in the world get by with only one type of letters.
For example the writing systems of Arabia, India, China, Korea, Japan and Ethiopia
don't differentiate large and small letters.

The alphabet of Pandunia uses logically only the small Basic Latin letters.

    a b c d e f g h i j k l m n o p r s t u v x y z



## Pronunciation

The sounds in Esperanto and the rules that govern how they go together are
primarily based on Polish, with additional influence from other European
languages like English and German, with little regard for how easy they
are to pronounce internationally. This gives rise to consonant clusters that
are difficult to pronounce for most people, especially at the beginnings
of words, such as "kn" as in "knabo", "kv" as in "kvar", "mn" as in
"mnemonika", "ŝr" as in "ŝranko", and "sc" as in "scii".

Pandunia's word structure is designed to balance keeping international words
recognizable and making them easy to pronounce for as many people as possible.
Thus, the only consonant cluster permitted at the beginning of a word is a
stop or fricative plus a liquid, such as "kr" as in "kristal".



## Eurocentrism

### Eurocentric grammar

Esperanto and most other Western auxiliary languages are pretty much
the same. They have largely the same Western European vocabulary (with
minor differences) and they repeat the same [Standard Average European]
(http://www.joerg-rhiemeier.de/Conlang/sae.html) features of grammar,
that are shared by French, English, German, Spanish and other languages
from West and Central Europe.

1. Word class is defined by suffixes. Verbs, nouns, adjectives and 
   adverbs have their specific endings.
2. Nouns (or at least pronouns) are inflected for cases such as
   nominative, dative and accusative.
3. Verbs are inflected for tense, person and/or number.
4. There are definite and/or indefinite articles.
5. Singular and plural forms are separate. The plural form is used
   redundantly also after numerals. For example in English "one cat,
   two cats" and in Esperanto "unu kato, du katoj".
6. Prepositions are used instead of postpositions.
7. There is a specific polite form for 2nd person singular pronoun.
8. There are separate gender-specific 3rd person singular pronouns.
9. The perfect tense is made up of _to have_ or _to be_ and a participle.
   For example in English "I have talked." and in Esperanto "Mi estas
   parolinta."
10. The passive is made up of _to be_ and a participle. For example in
    English "I am seen." and in Esperanto "Mi estas vidita."
11. The normal word order is subject-verb-object. 
12. The word order is changed in questions.

Both English and Esperanto have all of the above except number 7. Ido,
Novial and Interlingua have all of them. In contrast for example Chinese
has only features 8 and 11, and the former is apparent only in the
written language – because of Western influence! (In Chinese there are
three characters for the 3rd person singular 他 (he), 她 (she) and 它 (it)
but all of them are pronounced the same, "tā".)

Standard Average European features are not bad just because they imply
Western bias. Some (not all) of them are bad because they are illogical
or simply difficult for those who are not used to them in their native
language. Many learners stumble with articles and "difficult" personal
pronouns. The world language should be free of such unnecessary features
and rules.

Pandunia has only features 1 and 11. These are also main features of
Esperanto. But otherwise Pandunia diverges greatly from Esperanto in
particular and from Standard Average European grammar in general. So
grammar-wise Pandunia is not Eurocentric like Esperanto.


### Western or global vocabulary?

Esperanto boasts with its international vocabulary. At a closer look
it's not so international. Most Esperanto words come from Western
languages. Esperanto chooses a European word even when no international
Western word can be found. Such words are birdo (bird, only in English),
vosto (tail, from Russian хвост) and knabo (boy, from German Knabe).

Isn't it arrogant to create a language for the world without looking
beyond your own neighbourhood? It was in the spirit of the time, the
time of colonialism, when Esperanto was created.

Pandunia acknowledges that there are many stocks of international words:
Western, Indian, Sinitic and Perso-Arabic being the major ones. Hundreds
of words are borrowed from each of them. Pandunia's vocabulary is evenly
global.



## Word class marking

Simple word class marking with final vowels is an ingenious idea and
it fits well with the Indo-European root-and-suffix word pattern. But
the way different word classes relate to each other can be confusing
if not handled carefully.


### Esperanto roots have inherent word class

One of the most confusing things in Esperanto is that, while it has
separate word class markers, the roots belong to word classes already!
What's even more confusing is that roots, which belong to the same
category, can belong to different word classes. 

For example blua (blue) and malferma (opening) are adjectives, but
the root blu- is an adjective while the root malferm- is a verb. This
results into weird asymmetries in word derivation. Additional 
asymmetry is caused by unsystematic distribution of transitivity in
verbs, which is illustrated by the root nask- (birth).

| blu-               | malferm-              | nask-                 |
|:-------------------|:----------------------|:----------------------|
| blua = blue        | -                     | naska = birth-        |
| blui = be blue     | -                     | -                     |
| -                  | malfermi = make open  | naski = give birth    |
| bluigi = make blue | -                     | -                     |
| bluiĝi = get blue  | malfermiĝi = get open | naskiĝi = be/get born |
|                    | malfermita = open(ed) | naskita = born        |


### Pandunia roots are classless

The roots are classless in Pandunia, so there's no need to memorize
whether for example kay- (open) is basically a verb or an adjective.
Word class is added by adding the appropriate ending: -i for adjectives
or stative verbs, -a for active verbs and -u for passive verbs.

| nil-               | kay-              | jen-               |
|:-------------------|:------------------|:-------------------|
| nili = (be) blue   | kayi = (be) open  | jeni = born        |
| nila = make blue   | kaya = make open  | jena = give birth  |
| nilu = get blue    | kayu = get open   | jenu = be/get born |

Commit message:

muta name za Pandunia pa Panlingue

eng/esperanti_i_pandunia.md, after:

# Esperanto vs. Panlingue

Esperanto has been the most popular constructed auxiliary language for
over a century since the 1890s. That's why all new auxiliary languages
are rightfully compared to it.


Esperanto has been criticized over the years. Many of the recurring
points of critique are included in Justin B. Rye's article
[Learn Not to Speak Esperanto](http://jbr.me.uk/ranto/index.html).
It has been replied in detail by [Vítor De Araújo]
(https://elmord.org/misc/kontrauranto/) and more broadly by
[Claude Piron](http://claudepiron.free.fr/articlesenanglais/why.htm)
among many others.

Despite all the critique, Esperanto has its merits and its relative
success among auxiliary languages is undeniable. But does it really
deserve its success? Is Esperanto really an ideal world language?
In this article we will review the most important points of critique
and compare Esperanto to Panlingue.



## Alphabet

The alphabet of Esperanto is as follows:

    A B C Ĉ D E F G Ĝ H Ĥ I J Ĵ K L M N O P R S Ŝ T U Ŭ V Z
    a b c ĉ d e f g ĝ h ĥ i j ĵ k l m n o p r s ŝ t u ŭ v z

People often criticize the letters with "hats" because they are not
included in the standard keyboards of typewriters, computers and smart
devices. The letters with hats really are a problem that could have been avoided.

What is often overlooked is that there are two sets of letters: big
letters and small letters. Both do the same basic task: they represent spoken
language in writing. It's like using two different hammers to hit one nail.
Most writing systems in the world get by with only one type of letters.
For example the writing systems of Arabia, India, China, Korea, Japan and Ethiopia
don't differentiate large and small letters.

The alphabet of Panlingue uses logically only the small Basic Latin letters.

    a b c d e f g h i j k l m n o p r s t u v x y z



## Pronunciation

The sounds in Esperanto and the rules that govern how they go together are
primarily based on Polish, with additional influence from other European
languages like English and German, with little regard for how easy they
are to pronounce internationally. This gives rise to consonant clusters that
are difficult to pronounce for most people, especially at the beginnings
of words, such as "kn" as in "knabo", "kv" as in "kvar", "mn" as in
"mnemonika", "ŝr" as in "ŝranko", and "sc" as in "scii".

Panlingue's word structure is designed to balance keeping international words
recognizable and making them easy to pronounce for as many people as possible.
Thus, the only consonant cluster permitted at the beginning of a word is a
stop or fricative plus a liquid, such as "kr" as in "kristal".



## Eurocentrism

### Eurocentric grammar

Esperanto and most other Western auxiliary languages are pretty much
the same. They have largely the same Western European vocabulary (with
minor differences) and they repeat the same [Standard Average European]
(http://www.joerg-rhiemeier.de/Conlang/sae.html) features of grammar,
that are shared by French, English, German, Spanish and other languages
from West and Central Europe.

1. Word class is defined by suffixes. Verbs, nouns, adjectives and 
   adverbs have their specific endings.
2. Nouns (or at least pronouns) are inflected for cases such as
   nominative, dative and accusative.
3. Verbs are inflected for tense, person and/or number.
4. There are definite and/or indefinite articles.
5. Singular and plural forms are separate. The plural form is used
   redundantly also after numerals. For example in English "one cat,
   two cats" and in Esperanto "unu kato, du katoj".
6. Prepositions are used instead of postpositions.
7. There is a specific polite form for 2nd person singular pronoun.
8. There are separate gender-specific 3rd person singular pronouns.
9. The perfect tense is made up of _to have_ or _to be_ and a participle.
   For example in English "I have talked." and in Esperanto "Mi estas
   parolinta."
10. The passive is made up of _to be_ and a participle. For example in
    English "I am seen." and in Esperanto "Mi estas vidita."
11. The normal word order is subject-verb-object. 
12. The word order is changed in questions.

Both English and Esperanto have all of the above except number 7. Ido,
Novial and Interlingua have all of them. In contrast for example Chinese
has only features 8 and 11, and the former is apparent only in the
written language – because of Western influence! (In Chinese there are
three characters for the 3rd person singular 他 (he), 她 (she) and 它 (it)
but all of them are pronounced the same, "tā".)

Standard Average European features are not bad just because they imply
Western bias. Some (not all) of them are bad because they are illogical
or simply difficult for those who are not used to them in their native
language. Many learners stumble with articles and "difficult" personal
pronouns. The world language should be free of such unnecessary features
and rules.

Panlingue has only features 1 and 11. These are also main features of
Esperanto. But otherwise Panlingue diverges greatly from Esperanto in
particular and from Standard Average European grammar in general. So
grammar-wise Panlingue is not Eurocentric like Esperanto.


### Western or global vocabulary?

Esperanto boasts with its international vocabulary. At a closer look
it's not so international. Most Esperanto words come from Western
languages. Esperanto chooses a European word even when no international
Western word can be found. Such words are birdo (bird, only in English),
vosto (tail, from Russian хвост) and knabo (boy, from German Knabe).

Isn't it arrogant to create a language for the world without looking
beyond your own neighbourhood? It was in the spirit of the time, the
time of colonialism, when Esperanto was created.

Panlingue acknowledges that there are many stocks of international words:
Western, Indian, Sinitic and Perso-Arabic being the major ones. Hundreds
of words are borrowed from each of them. Panlingue's vocabulary is evenly
global.



## Word class marking

Simple word class marking with final vowels is an ingenious idea and
it fits well with the Indo-European root-and-suffix word pattern. But
the way different word classes relate to each other can be confusing
if not handled carefully.


### Esperanto roots have inherent word class

One of the most confusing things in Esperanto is that, while it has
separate word class markers, the roots belong to word classes already!
What's even more confusing is that roots, which belong to the same
category, can belong to different word classes. 

For example blua (blue) and malferma (opening) are adjectives, but
the root blu- is an adjective while the root malferm- is a verb. This
results into weird asymmetries in word derivation. Additional 
asymmetry is caused by unsystematic distribution of transitivity in
verbs, which is illustrated by the root nask- (birth).

| blu-               | malferm-              | nask-                 |
|:-------------------|:----------------------|:----------------------|
| blua = blue        | -                     | naska = birth-        |
| blui = be blue     | -                     | -                     |
| -                  | malfermi = make open  | naski = give birth    |
| bluigi = make blue | -                     | -                     |
| bluiĝi = get blue  | malfermiĝi = get open | naskiĝi = be/get born |
|                    | malfermita = open(ed) | naskita = born        |


### Panlingue roots are classless

The roots are classless in Panlingue, so there's no need to memorize
whether for example kay- (open) is basically a verb or an adjective.
Word class is added by adding the appropriate ending: -i for adjectives
or stative verbs, -a for active verbs and -u for passive verbs.

| nil-               | kay-              | jen-               |
|:-------------------|:------------------|:-------------------|
| nili = (be) blue   | kayi = (be) open  | jeni = born        |
| nila = make blue   | kaya = make open  | jena = give birth  |
| nilu = get blue    | kayu = get open   | jenu = be/get born |
