eng/index.md, before:

# halou, dunia!

Hello, world!
Welcome to learn about Pandunia, the evenly global helping language!

![](http://www.pandunia.info/grafe/halou_dunia.png "halou dunia!")  
<small>Image designed by [Freepik](http://www.freepik.com)</small>

## What is Pandunia?

Pandunia is a helping language for world-wide use.
It is an easy language that people can use to talk with each other
when they don't talk any other common language.
It is meant to supplement other languages in our multilingual world.

Pandunia is a constructed language.
It is simpler, more regular and easier to learn than natural world languages,
like English, French, Spanish, Chinese, Russian, Arabic and Hindi.
Learning Pandunia is equally easy for everybody.
Its words have been borrowed from many languages on all continents and all cultures of the world.

![](http://www.pandunia.info/bandir/bandir.png "The flag of Pandunia")

## Coming soon...

New and improved version of Pandunia will be published in March 2021.
Version 2.0 includes improved grammatical structures, more logical structure words, and new and changed words.


## How to learn it?

- [The basics](baze.md) in one short page
- [Lessons with Dialogs](darse.md)
- [Flashcards and quizzes](https://lingopolo.org/pandunia/) in Lingopolo
- [Mini lessons with pictures](http://www.pandunia.info/pandunia/mini_darse.html)
- [Phrasebook](fraze.md)
- [Grammar of Pandunia](pan.pdf) in PDF format

- [Searchable dictionary](tiddly.html)
- [English-Pandunia](engli-pandunia.md) dictionary
- [Pandunia-English](pandunia-engli.md) dictionary
- [Origins of words](leksaslia.md)


## Texts

- [The rich man and the poor man](rici_man_i_miskin_man.md)
- [Fandom Wiki in Pandunia](https://pandunia.fandom.com/)

## Articles

- [Pandunia - a new world language](dunia_baxe.md)
- [Mentions about Pandunia in other publications](makal_tema_pandunia.md)
- [Why do I like Pandunia?](http://www.pandunia.info/makal/Why_do_I_like_Pandunia.pdf) - opinions from learners
- [Esperanto vs. Pandunia](esperanti_i_pandunia.md)

## Presentations (in PDF format)

- [General Presentation](Pandunia-presentation.pdf)

## Join Others

Many people are already interested about Pandunia and they are speaking it.
You can find Pandunia forums in several places:

- Links and discussion in [Reddit](https://www.reddit.com/r/pandunia/)
- [Friends of Pandunia](http://www.facebook.com/groups/pandunia) in Facebook
- Channels in Telegram instant messenger:
    * [multilingual](https://t.me/joinchat/AAAAAEPVsifmS6xRLAlxVA)
    * [in Esperanto](https://pandunia.telegramo.org/)
    * [in Pandunia](https://t.me/joinchat/AAAAAENlKqzlMtGkrmf5rg).
- Find other Pandunia speakers in [Amikumu](https://amikumu.com/) app!
- [channels in Discord](https://discord.gg/FWavWeG)
- QQ channel: 717549404
- You can follow Pandunia also on [Twitter](https://twitter.com/pandunia_).
  Spread the word!
- You can help to [translate this site](tarja_netoloke.md)

![](http://www.pandunia.info/grafe/mome_loga_pandunia.png "mome loga pandunia!")  
<small>Image designed by [Freepik](http://www.freepik.com)</small>

You can contact the creator and a main developer of Pandunia, Risto Kupsala, via email
[risto@pandunia.info](mailto:risto@pandunia.info) and in the aforementioned forums.

Commit message:

muta name za Pandunia pa Panlingue

eng/index.md, after:

# halou, dunia!

Hello, world!
Welcome to learn about Panlingue, the evenly global helping language!

![](http://www.panlingue.info/grafe/halou_dunia.png "halou dunia!")  
<small>Image designed by [Freepik](http://www.freepik.com)</small>

## What is Panlingue?

Panlingue is a helping language for world-wide use.
It is an easy language that people can use to talk with each other
when they don't talk any other common language.
It is meant to supplement other languages in our multilingual world.

Panlingue is a constructed language.
It is simpler, more regular and easier to learn than natural world languages,
like English, French, Spanish, Chinese, Russian, Arabic and Hindi.
Learning Panlingue is equally easy for everybody.
Its words have been borrowed from many languages on all continents and all cultures of the world.

![](http://www.panlingue.info/bandir/bandir.png "The flag of Panlingue")

## Coming soon...

New and improved version of Panlingue will be published in March 2021.
Version 2.0 includes improved grammatical structures, more logical structure words, and new and changed words.


## How to learn it?

- [The basics](baze.md) in one short page
- [Lessons with Dialogs](darse.md)
- [Flashcards and quizzes](https://lingopolo.org/panlingue/) in Lingopolo
- [Mini lessons with pictures](http://www.panlingue.info/panlingue/mini_darse.html)
- [Phrasebook](fraze.md)
- [Grammar of Panlingue](pan.pdf) in PDF format

- [Searchable dictionary](tiddly.html)
- [English-Panlingue](engli-panlingue.md) dictionary
- [Panlingue-English](panlingue-engli.md) dictionary
- [Origins of words](leksaslia.md)


## Texts

- [The rich man and the poor man](rici_man_i_miskin_man.md)
- [Fandom Wiki in Panlingue](https://panlingue.fandom.com/)

## Articles

- [Panlingue - a new world language](dunia_baxe.md)
- [Mentions about Panlingue in other publications](makal_tema_panlingue.md)
- [Why do I like Panlingue?](http://www.panlingue.info/makal/Why_do_I_like_Panlingue.pdf) - opinions from learners
- [Esperanto vs. Panlingue](esperanti_i_panlingue.md)

## Presentations (in PDF format)

- [General Presentation](Panlingue-presentation.pdf)

## Join Others

Many people are already interested about Panlingue and they are speaking it.
You can find Panlingue forums in several places:

- Links and discussion in [Reddit](https://www.reddit.com/r/panlingue/)
- [Friends of Panlingue](http://www.facebook.com/groups/panlingue) in Facebook
- Channels in Telegram instant messenger:
    * [multilingual](https://t.me/joinchat/AAAAAEPVsifmS6xRLAlxVA)
    * [in Esperanto](https://panlingue.telegramo.org/)
    * [in Panlingue](https://t.me/joinchat/AAAAAENlKqzlMtGkrmf5rg).
- Find other Panlingue speakers in [Amikumu](https://amikumu.com/) app!
- [channels in Discord](https://discord.gg/FWavWeG)
- QQ channel: 717549404
- You can follow Panlingue also on [Twitter](https://twitter.com/panlingue_).
  Spread the word!
- You can help to [translate this site](tarja_netoloke.md)

![](http://www.panlingue.info/grafe/mome_loga_panlingue.png "mome loga panlingue!")  
<small>Image designed by [Freepik](http://www.freepik.com)</small>

You can contact the creator and a main developer of Panlingue, Risto Kupsala, via email
[risto@panlingue.info](mailto:risto@panlingue.info) and in the aforementioned forums.
