eng/lekse_lojia.md, before:

# Word building

## Productive word derivation

Word derivation is productive in Pandunia. Everybody can freely build new words!

Sometimes regularly derived Pandunia words differ in form and/or meaning from their English counterparts.

**nas** : people, folk (from Arabic ناس /nās/ )  
**nasi** : popular, national  
**nasia** : nation (it resembles Afrikaans "nasie" and Russian "нация" /natsiya/ )  
**nasiste** : nationalist (one who puts their own people first)  
**nasistia** : nationalism

Sometimes back-derivation leads to new words.

**injener** : an engineer  
**injena** : to engineer  

Any words and affixes can be combined together. In other words, you don't have to mimic existing languages.

**bude** : realization, awareness, enlightenment  
**buda** : to realize, to become aware of  
**budi** : aware  
**budiste** : Buddhist  
**budistia** : Buddhism  


## Origins of Suffixes

### -a

**-a** is the marker of verbs in VO word order. It is a common verb ending in many natural languages, including Bengali, Swahili, Romanian and Swedish. So, there are pre-existing models for -a, but also other vowels serve as verb endings in different languages.

### -e

**-e** is a usual noun ending in French, English and German.

### -er

**-er** forms nouns that denote an agent. It comes originally from Latin suffix _-arius_, which is present in a handful of English words including _secretary_ (Latin: _secretarius_), _notary_ (Latin: _notarius_) and _vicar_ (Latin: _vicarius_).

This suffix is more productive in Slavic languages. It is used for example in many Serbo-Croatian words, including _ribar_ (fisher), _pekar_ (baker), _ljekar_ (doctor) and _novinar_ (journalist).

Among Romance languages, Romanian uses the suffix -er. For example _văcar_ (herdsman) and _fierar_ (blacksmith). In Spanish the equivalent suffix is -ero (as in _vaquero_ and _herrero_), -eiro in Portuguese (_vaqueiro_ and _ferreiro_) and -eur in French.

In Germanic languages this suffix is most often written -er but the vowel is actually a schwa sound. For example, English _baker_ and German _Bäcker_ sound almost like Pandunia's **beker**.

### -i

**-i** describes something that is similar to the root word. It comes from several sources.

-i is similar in sound to the adjectival ending -y in English, f.ex. watery.

In Arabic, Persian, Urdu and Hindi -ī is a very common suffix for deriving adjectives from nouns. For example _islāmī_ = Islamic, _insānī_ humane, _pakistānī_ Pakistani.

In Japanese -i is a frequent adjectival suffix (of the so called i-adjectives).

Also in Hungarian -i is a productive adjectival suffix, ex. _kéz_ = hand → _kézi_ = manual; _Európa_ Europe → _európai_ European; _Ázsia_ Asia →  _ásziai_ Asian.


### -ia

**-ia** is a very common and wide-spread suffix. It's used in many languages in names of countries and regions. Pandunia adopts this practice.

| Pandunia | asia            | italia              | rusia               | suria             | turkia              |
|:---------|:---------------:|:-------------------:|:-------------------:|:-----------------:|:-------------------:|
| English  | Asia            | Italy               | Russia              | Syria             | Turkey              |
| Italian  | Asia            | Italia              | Russia              | Siria             | Turchia             |
| Russian  | Азия<br>(Aziya) | Италия<br>(Italiya) | Россия<br>(Rossiya) | Сирия<br>(Siriya) | Турция<br>(Turciya) |
| Turkish  | Asya            | İtalya              | Rusya               | Suriye            | Türkiye             |
| Arabic   | آسِيَا <br>(āsiyā) | إِيطَالِيَا <br>(ītāliyā) | رُوسِيَا <br>(rūsiyā)  | سُورِيَا <br>(sūriyā) | تُرْكِيَّا <br>(turkiyā)  |

In Romance and Germanic languages this suffix is also productive in deriving place names from names of professions. For example in English _baker → bakery_, in German _Bäcker → Bäckerei_, in Spanish _panadero → panadería_, and in French _boulanger → boulangerie_. Pandunia adopts also this practice: **beker** (baker) → **bekeria** (bakery).

By coincidence, Japanese has a similar sounding suffix for place names:
パン (pan = bread) → パン屋 (panya = bakery).

The suffix **-ia** is also used with names of governments and other organizations. This is also a common practice across languages. For example **imperia** (empire) has parallels in Spanish _imperio_ and Russian _империя_ /imperiya/. **rajia** (kingdom) is preceded by Hindi राज्य /rājya/. **dem kratia** (democracy) of course has many precedents, among others German _Demokratie_.

In addition **-ia** is used in words for abstract systems of thinking, such as science and religion. There are lots of examples in natural languages for this pattern too.

| Pandunia | filosofia   | kimia     | fizikia  |
|:---------|:------------|:----------|:---------|
| English  | philosophy  | chemistry | physics  |
| French   | philosophie | chimie    | physique |
| German   | Philosophie | Chemie    | Physik   |
| Arabic   | falsafa     | kīmiyā    | fīziyā   |
| Swahili  | falsafa     | kemia     | fizikia  |


### -iste

**-iste** is a suffix that denotes a person who tends to behave or think in a certain way. It is a common suffix in Western languages.

### -istia

**-istia** is combination of **-iste** and **-ia**. It means an ideology or a doctrine.

### -u

"Passive" OV verb ending -u comes from two important West African languages, Hausa (f.ex. _soya_ = to fry; _soyu_ = to be fried) and Wolof (f.ex. _tëj_ = to close; _tëju_ = to get closed).

Commit message:

muta name za Pandunia pa Panlingue

eng/lekse_lojia.md, after:

# Word building

## Productive word derivation

Word derivation is productive in Panlingue. Everybody can freely build new words!

Sometimes regularly derived Panlingue words differ in form and/or meaning from their English counterparts.

**nas** : people, folk (from Arabic ناس /nās/ )  
**nasi** : popular, national  
**nasia** : nation (it resembles Afrikaans "nasie" and Russian "нация" /natsiya/ )  
**nasiste** : nationalist (one who puts their own people first)  
**nasistia** : nationalism

Sometimes back-derivation leads to new words.

**injener** : an engineer  
**injena** : to engineer  

Any words and affixes can be combined together. In other words, you don't have to mimic existing languages.

**bude** : realization, awareness, enlightenment  
**buda** : to realize, to become aware of  
**budi** : aware  
**budiste** : Buddhist  
**budistia** : Buddhism  


## Origins of Suffixes

### -a

**-a** is the marker of verbs in VO word order. It is a common verb ending in many natural languages, including Bengali, Swahili, Romanian and Swedish. So, there are pre-existing models for -a, but also other vowels serve as verb endings in different languages.

### -e

**-e** is a usual noun ending in French, English and German.

### -er

**-er** forms nouns that denote an agent. It comes originally from Latin suffix _-arius_, which is present in a handful of English words including _secretary_ (Latin: _secretarius_), _notary_ (Latin: _notarius_) and _vicar_ (Latin: _vicarius_).

This suffix is more productive in Slavic languages. It is used for example in many Serbo-Croatian words, including _ribar_ (fisher), _pekar_ (baker), _ljekar_ (doctor) and _novinar_ (journalist).

Among Romance languages, Romanian uses the suffix -er. For example _văcar_ (herdsman) and _fierar_ (blacksmith). In Spanish the equivalent suffix is -ero (as in _vaquero_ and _herrero_), -eiro in Portuguese (_vaqueiro_ and _ferreiro_) and -eur in French.

In Germanic languages this suffix is most often written -er but the vowel is actually a schwa sound. For example, English _baker_ and German _Bäcker_ sound almost like Panlingue's **beker**.

### -i

**-i** describes something that is similar to the root word. It comes from several sources.

-i is similar in sound to the adjectival ending -y in English, f.ex. watery.

In Arabic, Persian, Urdu and Hindi -ī is a very common suffix for deriving adjectives from nouns. For example _islāmī_ = Islamic, _insānī_ humane, _pakistānī_ Pakistani.

In Japanese -i is a frequent adjectival suffix (of the so called i-adjectives).

Also in Hungarian -i is a productive adjectival suffix, ex. _kéz_ = hand → _kézi_ = manual; _Európa_ Europe → _európai_ European; _Ázsia_ Asia →  _ásziai_ Asian.


### -ia

**-ia** is a very common and wide-spread suffix. It's used in many languages in names of countries and regions. Panlingue adopts this practice.

| Panlingue | asia            | italia              | rusia               | suria             | turkia              |
|:---------|:---------------:|:-------------------:|:-------------------:|:-----------------:|:-------------------:|
| English  | Asia            | Italy               | Russia              | Syria             | Turkey              |
| Italian  | Asia            | Italia              | Russia              | Siria             | Turchia             |
| Russian  | Азия<br>(Aziya) | Италия<br>(Italiya) | Россия<br>(Rossiya) | Сирия<br>(Siriya) | Турция<br>(Turciya) |
| Turkish  | Asya            | İtalya              | Rusya               | Suriye            | Türkiye             |
| Arabic   | آسِيَا <br>(āsiyā) | إِيطَالِيَا <br>(ītāliyā) | رُوسِيَا <br>(rūsiyā)  | سُورِيَا <br>(sūriyā) | تُرْكِيَّا <br>(turkiyā)  |

In Romance and Germanic languages this suffix is also productive in deriving place names from names of professions. For example in English _baker → bakery_, in German _Bäcker → Bäckerei_, in Spanish _panadero → panadería_, and in French _boulanger → boulangerie_. Panlingue adopts also this practice: **beker** (baker) → **bekeria** (bakery).

By coincidence, Japanese has a similar sounding suffix for place names:
パン (pan = bread) → パン屋 (panya = bakery).

The suffix **-ia** is also used with names of governments and other organizations. This is also a common practice across languages. For example **imperia** (empire) has parallels in Spanish _imperio_ and Russian _империя_ /imperiya/. **rajia** (kingdom) is preceded by Hindi राज्य /rājya/. **dem kratia** (democracy) of course has many precedents, among others German _Demokratie_.

In addition **-ia** is used in words for abstract systems of thinking, such as science and religion. There are lots of examples in natural languages for this pattern too.

| Panlingue | filosofia   | kimia     | fizikia  |
|:---------|:------------|:----------|:---------|
| English  | philosophy  | chemistry | physics  |
| French   | philosophie | chimie    | physique |
| German   | Philosophie | Chemie    | Physik   |
| Arabic   | falsafa     | kīmiyā    | fīziyā   |
| Swahili  | falsafa     | kemia     | fizikia  |


### -iste

**-iste** is a suffix that denotes a person who tends to behave or think in a certain way. It is a common suffix in Western languages.

### -istia

**-istia** is combination of **-iste** and **-ia**. It means an ideology or a doctrine.

### -u

"Passive" OV verb ending -u comes from two important West African languages, Hausa (f.ex. _soya_ = to fry; _soyu_ = to be fried) and Wolof (f.ex. _tëj_ = to close; _tëju_ = to get closed).
